Groups that we talked about earlier reacted to
this cut off of federal funding as far as projects
that they had been relatively assured of getting
rehab that had been promised and this type of
thing. How are they reacting? How do planners
react to their different demands that they have
coming in now? Well, the Planning Department of
the City of Austin is not involved in the Community
Development Program, in the delivery of services
directly. nor are they involved any longer in the
planning for the use of those funds. That's done
through the city's human services department.
Federal programs have been centralized in the
human services department, while overall
comprehensive plans, zoning, and things have
been in the planning department. The
neighborhood groups most closely affected by the
cutoff of funds, or not cutoff, but the
withholding of funds, because the funds are still
available, they're just being held. The
withholding of funds has been affected of groups
like Texas Acorn, some of the minority
neighborhoods, not well organized, but
dependent upon these kind of activities to
support the neighborhoods. They have, they have
expressed great concern. They've repeatedly
made statements and tried to work with city
officials. And they're as anxious as we are to
resolve it, but we all feel powerless. It's out of
our hands, there's nothing we can do about it.
During the 1950s when the The federal government
had a push for building an interstate highway
system of transportation. What planning was
involved by Austin City in order that areas would
be best served by the interstate system? And how
were areas impacted in the suburbs in that? Well, I
don't know how planning occurred in Austin. I
suspect the State Highway Department did it all.
This is their headquarters and this is the State
Capitol and they're going to take care of it. I can
tell you what the result was. The result was
Interstate 35 came right through the center of the
heart of the community. It segregated the East
Austin portion of this community, which was
predominantly minority and poor, from the more
affluent and business oriented West and Central
Austin. it did in fact sever some 1,500 homes from
their historical neighborhood
by placing them in the West Austin area when they
really had living ties to East Austin. These homes
were greatly dilapidated, problems in it. 1956
the interstate was announced right through The
east side of Austin, accessible to the state
capital, the University of Texas, was coming
right through the heart of town. Followed within
ten years was the declaration of the Urban Renewal
District that removed all the housing from the
west side of the freeway, and so the expansion of
state government. It's been viewed, and I think in
many respects rightly so, by the East Austinites
as a wall and a barrier that cuts them off from full
participation in the community. And in fact,
those that were cut off by it have been removed.
Those who were displaced as a result of interstate
highways in the area and as a result of urban
renewal programs, how did the planning
department in Austin attempt to accommodate
their relocating? Planning departments, to my
knowledge, had no role whatsoever. The Urban
Renewal Agency, created in 1956-57, did all of
that. They used the Federal Relocation Act and
benefits and all of that, and they did everything.
The city planning department had only one role,
and that was in the preparation of the urban
renewal plans done by consultants. The planning
department reviewed them, the planning
commission reviewed them, and the council
adopted them, and that was it. Obviously there are
a great deal of state projects that have impacted
the city of Austin. What are some of the more
significant of these within the city? Where do you
start? Gee, the state has always had the complex
from the early day to the layout of the capitol.
From 11th Street to Martin Luther King, 19th
Street. Those were not the original names of the
streets. They were changed several times. Austin
had a very characteristic and something I've seen
repeated in other cities. The rivers of Texas were
the north-south streets, and the trees of Texas
were the east-west streets. Those tree names have
been replaced with numbers, though in the center
city, the rivers still remain. There's just been a
characteristic complete building program based
on an old, old plan of the expansion of state
government. Some of the greater impact on the city
of Austin has been that when you look at the
community in light of its total governmental
impact, it's been said that over 50% of the land
within the community itself is tax exempt,
therefore creating severe economic constraints
on city government. Actions taken by the state and
the university, of course, are not subject to
approval by the city of Austin. Street closings
have occurred, rerouting of traffic has
occurred, significant buildings have been
constructed, which may or may not fit into the
landscape the community wants to see, but are not
under the control of the community. There's not
been any friction that I'm aware of, however.
There's always been a very strong partnership
between the state, the city, and the university
And though there are inconveniences, I've never
seen outright or been aware of any outright
conflict between the two or three. Which private
development projects would you say played a major
role in the city's planning history?
Well, I'd have to have some idea of what time frame.
If we look from 1975, from my perspective, of
planning. Two recent activities have occurred,
three now, that I feel will have a long range impact
on this community, much longer than perhaps many
people are willing to admit. The city has been in an
aggressive downtown redevelopment attitude and
the goals have expressed the need for a compact
city Yet in the last three years, three very large,
very significant projects have been located just
south of Town Lake. They are going to begin the high
impact of existing neighborhoods in that area.
And I foresee a further expansion of the central
business district south of Town Lake, something
that had never been talked about and really had
been discouraged in the goals. The Hyatt Regency,
the American Statesman newspaper, and now
another new hotel will have some very, very long
range and serious effects on land values and
intrusion in those very close in neighborhoods
that exist on that side of the river.
You mentioned earlier dates and a little bit on the
methods of review and revision that need to be
undertaken for changing the city's
comprehensive plan Has the development of the
city's charter itself and the changes in the city
charter had a significant role in planning in
Austin? They've had a very significant role in the
operation and the role that the city government
has played. They've not had a significant role
that I see, in revisions anyway, as far as the
impact of planning. Planning is very strongly
recognized and provided for in the charter. No one
has ever attempted to do anything other than
strengthen that. Other revisions have changed
the role of the council and the role of other
people. Have ordinances dealing with planning
implementation had a significant role in
changing planning in Austin? Yes, particularly
in regards to subdivision activity as new
development occurs. New standards based on the
master plan for density, for layout, for street
facilities, utilities, the development of the
CIP itself all critically affect the shape and the
level of services this community provides. How
about different controls on height, building
height that Austin City has tried to employ? How
has this affected planning? In the center city,
there's been a discussion for some four years
about the establishment of height limit zones to
protect the view of the capital for those who would
be entering this community. A unanimous proposal
for the establishment of a height ceiling in
downtown Austin was submitted to the city council
over two years ago by the planning commission
after long debate. The council tabled it, and it
has never come up again. and there is still great
consternation from the members of the Planning
Commission that that is a necessary activity, the
Council has not seen fit to pass it. You mentioned
that most of your planning experience with Austin
City has been in the recent past. To the best of your
recollection, though, what individuals and what
organizational changes within the Austin City
Planning Department, as far as administration
goes, have had a significant impact upon planning
here. Let's talk maybe about specific department
heads and that. Well, I think certainly Dick Lilly
has had a tremendous impact on what we'll know this
city to be in future years. The commitment made by
him and his staff and the Planning Commission and
all of those who saw this need to to involve the
citizen in the determination of their own future
is something that the city has now embraced and I
don't think would ever attempt to change. The wide
concern for citizen participation in this city is
so deep-rooted that it's become part of our
heritage. I think Dick Lilly should be given
tremendous credit for that as the leader of that
and a strong supporter of it. He also brought, of
course, the the beginning of organization of
neighborhood groups, which has led, as I said, to
some 65 groups now being recognized by the city.
In my experience, a hearty commitment towards the
environment and the protection of the lakes, the
protection of the hill country, brought forth the
development of the Environmental Resource
Management Department, whose sole function it is
to look after the environment. While that's
characteristically a planner's role in looking
at the development of the city, the
sophistication and everything is so great in
Austin that this city saw fit to create an entire
department whose only role was environmental
department, environmental management, and one
of the few in the state. Nationally, that is fairly
unique for a city the size of it. Yes, I believe
that's true. The current director, Dr. Maureen
McReynolds, came from San Diego where she was
director of environmental resources. That was
not an uncharacteristic thing in California, but
for Texas, we may still be the only city that has
that kind of commitment. They work very, very
closely. Their offices are co-located with the
Planning Department, so there's tremendous
cooperation. Have there been significant
administrative changes, whether formal or
informal, between the Planning Department, the
and the city council and the planning staff and the
city manager in Austin? I'd say yes. And I'd say
that they are formal. When I first arrived in
Austin, the planning department, in accordance
with the charter, had full control over all
planning activities in the community. They wrote
the capital improvements program. They provided
for federal distribution, federal planning for
community development block grants and others.
And over the years since that time, the capital
improvements program has become part of the city
manager staff and is now reviewed only by the city
planning department. The federal programs have
been taken away and planning for those programs
has now been placed into another operational
department, the human services department.
Issues such as economic development, manpower
and jobs, the programs that I operate for
rehabilitation and conservation are no longer an
issue for the planning department. They're not
involved in those. I personally believe they
should totally be involved in them, but the
current operation is that the planning
department does zoning, subdivision, and master
plan. That's it. All of the implementation, the
specifics of where the money goes and when to
accomplish what it goes are done in other
departments now. Those functions that are now
performed by other departments outside of the
planning department, Have there been
administrative changes informally whereby
different departments
have incorporated plan implementation
functions, for example, that are outside of what
originally was intended?
Well, the department, the original organization
was that the planning department prepared all of
the block ramp plan an application for the
development and improvement of the community,
and then it was implemented by the city's human
services department. Now the human services
department does both the planning and
implementation. The environmental department
reviews and has authority over the city's
environmental creek and waterways ordinance.
That was never part of the planning department's
function, but they played a very strong role in
environment up to that point. though they still do
because it all impacts subdivision.
Informally, until the current time, for the past
three and a half years, even after planning for
federal programs left the planning department,
they in fact still were done that way because the
human services department came right back and
needed help to get the job done. They didn't have
the staff capability to do it. I think they're
getting away from that now. Is there much of a
struggle or competitiveness between different
city departments to have more control over plan
implementation functions as a result of that?
There is between those two departments.
The feeling in the Human Services Department
having control over some five to six million
dollars a year, pure plan implementation,
neighborhood conservation, neighborhood
improvement, neighborhood development, very
strong planning roles. has been that they control
that function and they've acted that way. The
planning department has lost any authority to
actually get out and implement those kinds of
plans. And it's become a very highly political
process. And many of the projects that are
developed now and implemented by the Human
Services Department do not reflect adequate
planning, nor do they reflect needs of the
community. And they become highly political
projects that are of, at least in my opinion, very
nebulous benefit.
You have been associated with Austin City
Planning Department formally for the last while.
What would you say the current status of planning
is in Austin?
Very active.
the department is moving with the planning
commission very very methodically and i think
very well organized towards the development of
comprehensive new zoning ordinance they're
looking at new options for growth management and
they're looking for new ways of implementing the
issues of the master plan the size of the city the
developmental corridor aspects and i'd say
they're even they're very very strongly involved
in major developmental issues for the city. And
you would say that perhaps in contrast to other
Texas cities where planning is considered an
intervention on private property rights, in
Austin decisions that are made by planners or
let's say by city council or the planning
commission are more readily accepted by the
public as a result of a greater deal of input then?
Yes, yeah. I think The openness and the
involvement of citizens still evolves with the
complaint of infringement on property rights,
but since it's had such a wide dissemination and
discussion, which of course takes a long time,
which delays your ability to get new plans going,
it has characteristically been the strongest
stable factor in the community. There are a
variety of different types of influences that can
play a role as far as playing in a particular
community goes. What influence would you say that
political forces and political aspect has had in
planning in Austin?
Well, I think it's been very significant. In 1976
when Jeff Frieden was elected mayor, along with
the council, who was deemed to be a liberal group of
individuals, there was a very strong commitment
toward limited growth, managed growth, not to be
construed as no growth, but a management of our
environmental resources, a sensible
development of our community in a way that was
beneficial to everyone who was here, and not to
create another Houston or Dallas or whatever, not
being derogatory towards them. That council came
in with a very strong mandate to control, to keep
Austin, Austin. To an extent it was successful, to
another extent it was not, and I think Jeff
Friedman would be the first to say so. Do you have to
know offhand approximately what percentage
population increased Austin experienced from 70
to 80? Yes, in 1970 the population was 250,000.
In 1980, it was 354,000, roughly one-third.
Historically, that is a larger increase than
would be expected in population. Sure, sure.
Austin has been a very rapid growth. Now between 76
and 78 during the Freedmen Council, growth
occurred, but it was not as rapid as it has been the
last two years. nor as rapid as it was from 70 to 75.
Would you say that religion has been a significant
influence as regards planning in Austin?
No, I don't think so. I would say that the churches
are organized and do exercise political power in
the community, but I've not seen any activities
that would attempt to manipulate or influence the
general planning community. How have the various
ethnic groups within Austin impacted planning
here? Very much. Very much. Particularly the
Mexican-American community. The growth of that
community has been
very strong. It is an increasing percentage of the
overall population. You would estimate
approximately what percent? Twenty-seven
percent of the community. And I think that we can
say that that is growing. Since the early 1970s,
particularly as you saw the 1976 council, the Jeff
Friedman council, pay more and greater attention
to the issues of the poor, the minorities, the
impact on the eastern side of the community. I
think there's been a greater organization,
greater impact, and now, of course, much greater
investment in fixing up those parts of the
community. So right now they're a very formidable
force in the community.
Do ethnic groups primarily reside in lower income
areas in Austin? Can it be typified in that sense,
or is that too broad a generalization? Well, the
poor areas of the city are predominantly minority
occupied. That doesn't mean that there aren't
affluent Minority workers live in other parts.
But if you look at the concentration of minorities
in this community on a map, you are also looking at
the poor areas of the community. And that is
unusual for any town. No, it's typical of every
country in the world. How has their involvement in
the planning process, let's say through the
neighborhood groups organization, been? Has it
been active? Has it been solicited as far as
changes, let's say from major thoroughfares or
public projects? There have been solicitations,
but they have been characteristically less
organized and have less of a vocal, they have vocal
people, a cadre of small groups who are very vocal
in the community and pushing the interest. They
have not been able to have the hundreds of people
that typically come out of Anglo areas. If you have
a neighborhood issue, every homeowner in the area
is interested and you can make it. make a
statement, and have everyone in your
neighborhood there. You can't do that in the
minority areas of the city. You have the
spokesmen, and by and large, 85%, 95% of the people
won't participate. They will sympathize, but
they won't get involved. But as a result of their
activities, more and more investment, both
general tax funds through its city's general
obligation bonds, and almost exclusively the
federal program. have all been chartered towards
the improvement of those areas and the
improvement of living conditions in them. Have
activities of the black community in Austin
significantly impacted planning, or do they
constitute a significant percentage that they
would have that kind of influence? The black
community in Austin has been decreasing. And
it's, I don't know if it's philosophical or not,
but we've looked at the history of South Texas
cities. As we move north, we're the most northern
city, I believe, I can't speak about Houston, but
coming out of the valley from the Mexican border,
we are probably the most northern city with a
large, organized Mexican-American community
within it. And that community is growing. looking
at South Texas, San Antonio, those areas, it has
happened that as the Mexican-American community
increased, the black community and in some
respects even the Anglo community has decreased.
We don't see in Austin a decrease in the Anglo
community, but we do see a continual erosion of the
percentage of the total population that the black
population is. As far as participation as a result
of employment in the planning department or as a
result of being elected to office, have ethnic
groups played a significant role in the planning?
Yes, they have. There is both factors.
Representation on the city council and on
commissions by both black and Mexican-American
individuals have have focused the needs and funds
for that matter on East Austin and South Austin,
where the minorities predominantly live.
Employment within the city under the city's
affirmative action plan has been significant,
and minorities are well represented in many, many
areas of the city. Not to the level that the plan
would require them to be, but significant
nonetheless. Has this been a recent factor, or has
this always existed historically in Austin, that
degree of visibility by ethnic groups? I'd say
it's not more than eight or nine years old. Fairly
recent. Yes. As an example, the 1924 plan, I
believe,
provided for a separate but equal community, and
it provided for the segregation of black people in
East Austin specifically. And of course during
those times segregation was the law of the land,
but yet here was a public document adopted. No one
of course today supports that, but it was public
policy during those times that separate but equal
was in fact going to occur in Austin. Lawsuits and
of course everything occurred to that, and East
Austin is exactly that case. As a result of that
policy and a result of that program we have a
predominantly minority area of the city which is
run down and needs significant investment to
bring it back. You mentioned back in 1839 when the
state legislature was looking for a city in which
to base a capital for taxes. Austin was considered
one of the advantages it had over other areas as far
as being created as a new city was its central
location. What other geographic factors have
influenced planning in Austin? The Highland
Lakes and the Colorado River have been an
extremely important factor. It's provided a
virtually unlimited water supply to this
community. The hills themselves, the Edwards
Plateau and the Central Texas Hills, the heritage
of all of Texas, begins in Austin. The hill country
has been the premier residential area of this
community. It is the thing to which everyone
aspires to live in, and it is the area that is most
sensitive environmentally. And so you have the
conflict of everyone wants to live in the central
Texas hills, yet at the same time, it's the area
that can least support that urbanization. That's
been a very strong characteristic of the
community, trying to determine how much can we
afford to allow development to occur in those
hills. Realizing that type of desirability, how
has planning in Austin attempted to alleviate
that kind of conflict? Well, planning in Austin
has attempted, by virtue of its environmental
basis, to establish growth corridors in the city
that will channel public investment and private
development into areas of less sensitive
environmental characteristics. What that has
meant is that the city has adopted a growth
corridor concept that says the Austin ought to
grow north and south and stay out of the hill
country, utilize it as a resource for this
community, but limit densities, limit public
investment so that we do not encourage rapid
urbanization of the area, which supports our
water supply and all of the other factors. That's
been effective, at least the capital
improvements program. Subdivision activity and
all has been very strongly related to protecting
the Hill Country.
What sociological influences would you say have
affected planning in Austin?
The high level of education as a result of state
employment and the University of Texas have
brought a very sophisticated and very
knowledgeable population to Austin. Especially
for a city its size. Especially for a city its size.
As the state capital and the seat of its largest
university, the city has benefited because of the
tremendous pool of knowledge and sophistication
that's here. Therefore, the planning activities
of this community have been much deeper thought
and widely discussed through the university,
through the state, through all of the thousands
and thousands of people who have tremendous
academic credentials in various, various forms.
The city has benefited tremendously from that.
They've had the university's resources, the
state's resources assisting in the development
of the future of this community. Geologically,
environmentally, organizationally, no area in
the city has been untouched by that talent pool.
You mentioned earlier that the military has not
played a particularly important role in planning
in Austin, military projects and that. So we can
discount that as a major influence on planning
here. Except as most recent, there is a current
problem involved with the location of the
existing airport and the conflict in the air
traffic that's occurring between our city
airport and the Bergstrom Air Force Base. That has
come over the past two years to result in studies
that say the city must build a new airport. And one
of the options at that time was to suggest a
co-location of the city and the military
utilizing Bergstrom as a